Lesson 1 
########

:date: 2012-09-04
:category: lessons
:tags: introduction, overview, calculus
:summary: Introduction to the course and review of calculus


================
What is physics?
================

Physics is about understanding, at a deep level, what is really going on in
the processes we see around us all the time, and also learning how to predict the future.  I can tell you exactly what will happen in situations I haven't seen before, because I can do the math to predict what will happen.



Physics II teaches you the basic principles, techniques, and thought processes
necessary to understand the transfer of energy through solids and fluids in the
form of waves, electric and magnetic fields, and light.  In addition you will
be able to analyze the claims of scientists and politicians as they relate to
the environment and other issues. You'll also practice developing explanatory
models for different phenomena, and testing those models using experiments you
will design yourself.

Many people dislike science and math because it makes them feel stupid. Because
scientists are unusually good at saying "You're wrong!"

If you learn nothing else in this class, I want you to learn this: Being Wrong
is Good. You cannot improve unless you hit the wall of your current
limitations. Being wrong is a sign that you've hit one of those walls, and is
therefore a signal about where you need to work. The goal is of course to
become not-wrong, but you cannot get there without going through some
wrongness. My job is to help you find those limits without hurting you, so you
can push them back.

I believe that this is true of everything worth doing, but it is particularly
clear in math and science, where the whole process works by proposing models
and testing them. A model cannot be a good model if there is no way that you
could discover it is false. People have an unfortunate tendency to seek out
evidence that supports their current belief, missing the evidence that
contradicts it. You are much more likely to avoid being misled by forming a
prediction/model/explanation/etc. that you think is good, then writing down
what kinds of evidence would show that you are WRONG, and then to go looking
for that CONTRADICTORY evidence.

The first thing we're going to do is take a test. The point of this test is to
help me ensure that I'm actually teaching you something. I'm setting up an
experiment, and my hypothesis is that you are going to learn a lot of physics
this term. That's what I want to have happen.  So I've identified a lot of
things that would count as evidence that you have NOT learned any physics,
and I will test you on them repeatedly through the term. Your grade will depend
on convincing me, over and over again, that you have learned specific concepts
and skills. The more things you try to convince me about, the
higher your grade can potentially get.

But for my tests to work, I have to have some information about where you're at
right now. Because one possible way that I could be misled is if you happen to
ALREADY know a lot. So this test is designed to help me find that
out. It's multiple choice, it's hard, and you should do your absolute best on
it -- think about the questions, they are designed to be tricky. When you are
finished, bring it up to me, and I have an assignment for you to work on for
next time, that you should get started on.

==========
The Course
==========

The class is not going to be easy. I'm not saying that to frighten you, I only
want to be as honest as possible. It will require work. A university course
expects that you should spend 1-2 hours outside of class for every hour in
class -- which corresponds to 4-8 hours for the lecture portion of the class,
and another 3-6 hours for the lab. That's just how much time it takes to
process and learn so you can expand your skills and knowledge. So I'm giving
assignments that will take up a chunk of that time, and expecting that you will
fill in time as needed to keep up. I know that many of you have jobs and other
expectations, and I respect that, but I still expect some comittment from you
to get the most possible out of this class. I promise that I will never waste
your time, or give you work just to fill in the time -- it will always be
carefully planned to help you get as much as possible out of your investment.

The grading for the class will be different from what you've probably seen
before. The lion's share of your grade will come from a long list of skills and
concepts that I've identified as being particularly important. You can find the
list on the syllabus, on ulearn, and on the course blog at
markbetnel.com/genphys. You should read that list frequently. I will give you
quizzes, tests, and assignments that are designed to test those skills, and
give you scores on a 1-4 scale that reflect your level of proficiency in each
one. If you get 4's on 90% of the skills, you will get an A for the standards
mastery portion of the course. If you get 4's on 80% of the skills, you will
get a B. If you ever get lower than a 4 on a skill, you are expected to make an
effort to improve your performance on it. Once you convince me that you are
going to do better on a new attempt at that skill, I will give you a new chance
to prove it. Your scores in the gradebook will reflect your highest level of
performance on each skill (so there is no cost to trying multiple times).

You should also try to identify skills that I have not mentioned -- if you can
convince me that there is an important skill that is not on the list, I will
create an assessment for that skill and give you a chance to prove your mastery
of that as well. So there is an opportunity to take control of what you will
learn and master in the course, and an incentive to reflect on what you have
learned and on your grades.

The rest of your grade will come from expected sources -- quiz scores on your
first attempt, the final exam, homework, attendance and participation, etc.

====
Math
====

The math in this course is one thing that messes a lot of people up.  We're
using calculus to describe physical processes, and doing so depends on you
being somewhat fluent in how to do derivatives, integrals, and simple
differential equations.  In my experience, most students coming into this class
don't have a very strong background in this, so we have to spend some time
reviewing it.  If you're not confident about your math background, the single
best thing you can do is to go back to your old calculus homework and redo
problems on derivatives and integrals of polynomial functions, and to really
think about what a derivative *is* and what an integral *is*.  If you
understand what those operations are really doing, you will be in enormously
better shape.  So our first in-class work is designed to help review some of
that calculus while refreshing your memory about the mechanics you had in
Physics I.

1.  Describe motion of person walking using
   
    a. Graphs
    b. Equations
    c. Derivative/Integral

2.  What is the relation between rates and the graphs? The equation?

3.  How do we translate between rates and quantities?

========
Homework
========

1. See Homework1_

.. _Homework1: ../homework-1.html


